the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
there were five types of problems we
just did - and now I'm going to convince
you that salt and water problems are in
fact the same as weak acid weak based
problems so we're going to move now to
today's handout so the pH of a salt
solution is determined by what made that
salt so a salt is formed when you
neutralize an acid with a base or a base
with an acid and so depending on what
acid and which base were used and mixed
together the salt might have different a
different pH so an example here if we
had HCl and NaOH that's gonna give our
friend table salt NaCl and water the pH
of the salt and water is not always
neutral in this case it would be but
it's not always neutral it depends on
the nature of the acid and the nature of
the base that were mixed together to
form that salt so there's some rules to
help you figure out whether something's
going to be acidic or basic and if you
have a salt that contains conjugate
acids in a conjugate acid of a weak base
so it has a conjugate acid in it it will
produce an acidic solution and if you
have a salt that has small highly
charged metal cations like iron +3 that
will also be acidic so we saw last time
I had the medicine from prescription
medicine for my daughter which was iron
sulfate was highly acidic so note that
periodic table Group one and group two
ions lithium plus one calcium plus two
sodium plus one ne these are all going
to be neutral
and in fact anything +1 neutral and then
salts that contain conjugate bases of
weak acids will produce basic solution
so you're gonna be asking yourself does
this solution have a conjugate acid of a
weak base does it have a conjugate base
of a weak acid does it have Group 1
group 2 what's in there and then you can
think about whether it's going to be
acidic neutral or basic so let's look at
some examples so we have a salt nh4cl
and we want to figure out is this going
to produce an acidic solution a neutral
solution or a basic solution so we need
to think about what went into making
this salt and we're going to break apart
the salt and we're going to think about
NH 4 plus and we're going to think about
CL minus so let's think about NH 4 plus
first and we're gonna ask the question
is NH 4 plus a conjugate acid of a weak
base and therefore a weak acid itself
one way to answer this question is to
look up the KA 4 NH 4 plus which happens
to be five point six times ten to the
minus ten you could also ask about the
weak base that it came from the weak
base in this case its conjugate base is
nh3 and ask if that's a weak base so if
you have something that is a con is an
acid here you can think about what the
base would be by removing H+ if you
remove a strum NH four plus you get NH
three and you can say is NH three a weak
base and look up a KB in this case it's
one point eight times time times ten to
the minus five so what do you think is
this is this a weak base and this a weak
acid with those numbers what do you
think is that a weak weak acid that a
strong acid
so it's a weak acid is this a weak base
yep so we can look also in this this
chart down here and so nh3 is a
moderately weak base and NH 4 plus is a
very weak base but it is Irene weak out
very weak acid but it is a weak acid so
we do have a conjugate acid of a weak
base so it is acidic not super acidic
but it is acidic and NH 3 is a weak base
and so we probably had NH 3 is our base
that was being added and it formed the
conjugate acid in this so then this
would produce an acidic solution because
we have this conjugate acid that's
formed so from this part just from the
NH 4 plus it should be acidic and now we
can consider CL minus so here we're
asking the question is CL minus a
conjugate base of a weak acid and
therefore itself a weak base and if you
try to look up the KB of CL minus you
would not find it in any table but you
could find in a table its conjugate acid
so if you add H + 2 CL - you get HCl and
so you could look up a ka for that in a
table and it's times 10 to the 7 so is
this a weak acid no it's a strong acid
so it's not a weak acid it's a strong
acid so is CL - gonna be basic no so it
is not it is not going to be a basic
solution if we look over here we see HCl
is a strong acid and so it's conjugate
base is ineffective at a space it just
doesn't work as a base at all so with a
number of 10 to the seventh it really
goes to completion it's a strong acid by
our definition and so CL - is not going
to do anything to the solution it's not
going to be useful as a weak base so
this solution is going to be neutral or
this the part
of the solution due to cl- will be
neutral so here we have something that
is acidic and something that's neutral
and so overall the solution is acidic so
you need to break down the two parts you
had an acid and a base being mixed here
we had HCL mixed with nh3 and formed
this nh4cl salt and that's going to be
acidic because HCL was a weak acid its
conjugate is ineffective
whereas nh3 was a weak base so it has a
conjugate acid that's a weak acid a very
weak acid but still a weak acid all
right so that's how you think about
these salt problems so they really break
down to weak acid and weak base problems
so why don't you give this one a try
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
that is correct alright let's look at
why that's correct so it will produce a
basic solution so we're going to break
it down to an A+ that's one of the
things in there and we ask is any plus a
conjugate acid of a weak base is it
going to be neutral acidic or basic and
what's it going to be it's going to be
neutral it is not a conjugate acid of a
weak base it's Group 1
it'll be neutral so this is not
contributing to the pH so let's look at
the second part and look at ch3coo - so
we have this can be divided into na + +
h 3 c oo - and then we ask is this a
conjugate base of a weak acid or we
could ask the other question is this
over here a weak acid and the KA for
that was given so is that a weak acid or
a strong acid it's a weak or strong weak
yes so the answer is yes its weak and so
it's conjugate base would also be a weak
base and so therefore this will be
acidic so sometimes we'll be given K a
sometimes you will be given K B's if
you're given either one of them you can
answer the question if you want you can
convert your ka to your Kb what would
you use to convert ka to KB kW right but
just with one of these pieces of
information you should be able to answer
this question so let's just look at the
general rule now you have a compound X Y
that can be broken up into x + and
you'll ask yourself is x + a conjugate
acid of a weak base if yes then the
solution will be acidic if no it'll be
neutral for y you have Y - is y - a
conjugate base of a weak acid if yes
then
it's gonna be add some basic nature to
this if no neutral and then overall you
say if it's acidic plus neutral that's
acidic basic plus neutral basic neutral
plus neutral neutral and if I give you a
question of something that is acidic and
basic you can't answer the question
without doing math because it'll depend
on the KA of one thing and the KB of the
other thing and you'll have to see which
one's a stronger acid and which ones or
a stronger base and so you can't just
simply answer the question now you may
note that I did mention that problem set
7 is long it takes a long time to do
these problems and so on exam writing a
fair exam when the problems take a long
time to do is hard but these are short
little things I could ask you to predict
the ph of salt by just thinking about
things and looking up some K B's and K
some K s so these are good short
questions on the exam so I'm probably
not going to give you one if it's
supposed to be a short question that is
an acid and a base mixed up mixed
together because then you'd have to do
some math so keep that keep that in mind
alright so salts salt and water problems
are really just weak acid in water or
weak base in water problems which you're
ready know how to do so we're gonna move
on now to buffers buffers so a buffer is
a solution that maintains approximately
a constant pH there'll be a little range
of pH that can change but the buffer
tries to keep the pH constant you use a
buffer to keep pH constant why is this
important well buffers are very
important in biology we all work at a
constant pH living things need to be at
a constant pH but a lot of times
chemical processes also need to be at a
constant pH and here's just a one
example of why buffers are important
we're looking for alternative energy
we're trying to develop alternative
energy there's this idea of creating
fuel cells that employ microbes
these little red circles or microbes
here there are microbes like Xuan Ella
that will live adhere to electrodes will
live on surfaces of electrodes metal
electrodes and they will eat things like
sugar and organics and they will
respirate electrons into the metal
electrodes so the electrons go in and
you create an electric current and you
can do have a fuel cell so it's a way of
generating an electric current and then
people have other ideas that some elect
some microbes live in electrodes other
microbes like more yellow thermo sea to
come they live on carbon dioxide they
convert carbon dioxide to things like
acetyl co a which is a fuel so you throw
those in there and then you like pump in
co2 and you make electric current so
there's a lot of great ideas of using
microbes so some of my research relates
to understanding the fundamentals of
these pathways and every once in a while
I venture to hear one of these kind of
big energy talks about you know how is
the development coming of these ideas
and so I heard one talk and I was
listening I was they wanted to know you
know is this really working or people
getting this to work what's sort of the
status and they talked about a lot of
technical difficulties of getting it to
work but they had discovered something
amazing something that might really
change the ability to do this and it
turned out that when you're generating
all this negative charge you need to
have positive charge around like H+ for
example and so you need to have protons
but it mattered the concentration of
those protons and they kind of had to be
kept constant and they discovered
buffers
50 minutes of my life this was a talk at
MIT the person discovered buffers I just
felt like writing a letter to Washington
saying can I have their research dollars
because I already know about buffers I
don't need to do a big research project
to discover that buffers keep things at
constant pH and that when you're using
living organisms and doing experiments
and doing reactions pH matters I already
knew that everyone who takes 511 one
already knows that and so this is part
of the reason I'm teaching you this
because you're some of you or it will
not go on in study chemistry you'll be
doing engineering you'll be doing
alternative energy you're doing all
sorts of things and you can be the
person in the room that raises your hand
go it's called a buffer and that is
going to change the speed of that
research they're just like right away
they're going to be using buffers and
when you do promise at seven you're
gonna know how to make a buffer so you
can not only raise your hand and say
it's called the buffer you could tell
people how to make a buffer to use in
their experiments so this is why the
material I'm teaching is really
important I go out there and I hear
these talks of people who are trying to
do these innovative things but they're
lacking in fundamental chemistry
knowledge that's hindering their ability
to do it so I want all of you to have
this knowledge whether you study
chemistry anymore or not so that you can
be the person who brings the KSAT
chemical principles into the design
process and I care a lot about
alternative energy it's going to be
super important in the future I care
that we don't destroy our planet going
after some forms of energy and these
idea of using microbes is a great one
but we just need people who know how to
work with them to get it to go right
alright so buffers
what are buffers you've got to know
about buffers a buffer consists an acid
buffer consists of a weak acid in its
conjugate base they're often supplied as
a salt which means you have a counter
ion that comes with it like sodium plus
or Cl minus and it buffers on the acidic
side of neutral
a base buffer or a basic buffer has a
weak base and its conjugate acid often
supplied as a salt and it buffers on the
basic side of neutral so the key to a
buffer is that it has a conjugate acid
it has an H a but it also has the
conjugate base it has a minus if it just
has a H a it's a weak acid that's not a
buffer that's a weak acid if you just
have a minus you just have your base
that's not a buffer you need to be both
an acid and a base a base and an acid an
acid and a base on the exam people do
buffer problems and they just have one
they don't have the other that's not a
buffer and I'm gonna write on your
little exam remember me twirling around
the room it was an acid and a base I
don't think you can ever forget this
this will be in your brain forever
buffer has an acid and a conjugate base
a conjugate base and a conjugate acid
okay let's look at some examples so if
you mix acetic acid and acetate salt its
conjugate but the conjugate base
supplied in the form of a salt so here
we have the acetic acid here we have the
acetate the conjugate base often will be
supplied there's probably gonna be some
na+ around and you get this dynamic
equilibrium it goes forward it goes back
it goes forward it goes back so when you
have this if you added a strong acid to
this solution you put in more acid into
this and you had equal amounts of this
and this then your conjugate base is
going to react with the strong acid and
you're gonna go in the back direction
and you're going to neutralize that acid
that was added and the pH should stay
more or less the same if you did a good
job making your
so the buffer can respond to the changes
in pH by ships in different directions
to use up the extra added acid or the
other way the extra added base so in
this case the acid that's added is
effectively removed and the pH stays the
same so a buffer can respond to added
acid a buffer can also respond to added
base if you add a base a strong base or
any kind of base and in this case
hydroxide ion would then remove a proton
from the weak acid from the acetic acid
forming water and some more of the
conjugate base and it's effectively
removed as well and those OS are
effectively removed and again if you did
a good job designing this buffer the pH
should stay constant so that's why you
need the conjugate acid and the
conjugate base you need the acid to
react with the base that's added and
keep the pH constant you need the base
to react with the acid that's added and
keep the pH constant if you just have
one it's not going to be a buffer all
right so buffer action again weak acid
transfers its protons it's h plus two o
h supplied by the base so here we have
added we have added base and it's going
to be reacted with the acid to be
neutralized a conjugate the conjugate
base a minus can accept protons from an
supplied acid if you add an acid it will
take those and will neutralize the acid
that's added so let's think about what
type of acids and conjugate bases are
gonna work to make a good buffer a
strong acid and its conjugate base does
not make a good buffer why don't you
tell me why
yep
so 67% so it's really about the fact
that the conjugate base of a strong acid
is really not a base at all it's
ineffective as a base and that's why
it's not going to work
buffer solution has to be in a dynamic
equilibrium you have to be able to push
it both ways
otherwise it's not going to work so a
conjugate base of a strong acid is
ineffective as a base and so if you add
an acid it won't be neutralized and the
pH will change so you need to have that
conscious as a conjugate base something
that's able to interact with the
hydronium ion or the acid that's added
and take its proton to neutralize it if
this doesn't happen the pH will be
affected so you need to have weak acids
and weak bases in your buffers they
could be moderately weak or very weak or
whatever but they have you have to have
a conjugate set that's going to be able
to push both directions where the acid
can interact with the added base and the
base can interact with the added acid
all right so all of this is really the
same for a basic buffer so we can look
at an example here of ammonia plus water
going to ammonium ion and hydroxide ion
and we can think about the same things
when you add a strong acid the base will
accept the protons and make more of your
conjugate acid when a strong base is
added the conjugate acid will donate its
proton and it will form nh3 again that
conjugate base and water and the pH will
say the same so it's the same idea the
only real difference between an acidic
buffer and a basic buffer is whether it
pH is in the acidic range or in the
basic range but the buffers work the
same way so I can redraw this picture to
have our different symbols on it but the
idea is the same the weak base will take
the proton supply
by the acid and the conjugate acid bh+
is going to protonate the o h- and again
keep the ph constant so the idea again
of the buffer then is that a buffer is a
mixture of weak conjugate acids and
faces again they're weak because its
partner needs to be effective as an acid
or a base it can't be ineffective weak
acid base mixtures that stabilize pH by
providing a source or a sink for protons
it either adds protons or takes protons
away it respond to add an acid it can
respond to added base so again
pH is important and buffering is
important our body has its own buffering
system so we have carbonic acid and
bicarbonate buffering agents in our
blood and our blood has to be kept in
the sort of neutral range over here if
it gets too acidic that is very
unhealthy for us leading to some pretty
severe symptoms and too much leads to
death if it's too basic that's really
bad also we have death and notice these
are not all that far away
there are a number of different medical
conditions that can affect the pH
diabetes their metabolic diseases
something else that is under your
control hydration you need to drink
enough water and as the weather gets
colder in Boston
people slop and stop drinking as much
water or start drinking like hot
beverages which don't hydrate as well so
keep hydrated if you're not hydrated you
can if it gets really bad it can start
affecting the pH of your blood which is
really not good so buffering very
important all right so let's do a sample
buffer problem so sample buffer problem
and this is important I actually know of
at least one professor that if you want
to do it you're up with them they'll
come to their office and they're gonna
say alright write down how you would
a buffer for me and do those
calculations so I can tell you later who
that is maybe I won't I don't know but
this is one of the tasks that someone
uses to see if they want you as a Europe
okay so here we have 1 mole of formic
acid and point 5 moles of the conjugate
base applied in the form of a salt with
sodium ions and those are added to water
and diluted to a total final
concentration of one liter and you're
given the KA and told to calculate the
ph so the first step is to write out the
equation so we have an acid in water
going to hydronium ions and a conjugate
base over here and we want to think
about what's there now what's it eeeek
and what's it equilibrium so initial
molarity change in molarity and your
equilibrium molarity so it's important
this word molarity don't put moles in
here put molarity in here but I made it
really easy for you because we have one
mole in one liter so the molarity is
10.5 moles in one liter the molarity is
0.5 and this is also really important
you're so used to only putting things
here when it's a buffer problem you got
to put something here too so you're
adding the acid with the conjugate base
at the same time this is not 0 this is
0.5 so now as this dynamic equilibrium
goes you're losing some of this and
gaining some of these so at equilibrium
we have 1 molar minus x axis our
hydronium ion concentration which is
what we want to know to calculate pH and
our conjugate base our format for meit
ion is 0.5 plus X we're given a KA and
we've written this expression as a acid
in water so we can use
ka the equilibrium constant is for the
expression as written so we can put that
in and we can supply the fill of the
rest out we have our products we have
the concentration of hydronium ion times
the concentration of formate ion the
conjugate base over the concentration of
our formic acid and again water does not
appear in the expression because it's
the solvent hydronium ion concentration
is X the conjugate base concentration is
0.5 plus X and the conjugate acid
concentration is 1 minus X so we can now
try that assumption that X is small or
we can use the quadratic equation but
why don't you just try that assumption
I'm going to take this expression if you
haven't written it all down yet put it
right up here and now with a clicker why
don't you tell me if we use the
approximation that X is small compared
to 1 in point 5 what does this simplify
to
all right ten more seconds
all right so 70 something percent yep so
let's take a look at that so here we're
making the assumption that X is small
compared to 0.5 and compared to 1 so
that means that we drop the plus X from
the 0.5 term and drop the minus X from
the 1 term so we're saying that these
are going to be small enough that it's
still going to be pretty much point 5
and 1 and then we have to test that in a
minute so if we use this we can
calculate X and it comes out to 3 point
5 4 times 10 to the minus 4 and then we
can check the assumption and before you
told me how to check assumptions and
that was I take X and I'll divide it by
0.5 which is the smaller of these two
and x by a hundred percent and we get
point zero six nine percent which is
less than 5 percent so the assumption is
okay and we don't have to check it
against 1 because if the Assumption X is
small compared to the smaller number is
valid it'll also be valid for the bigger
number so you only check it for the
smaller number and then we can solve so
we have to think about we solved for X
we're happy with the X our assumption
was okay but then we have to remember
what X is and X is the hydronium ion
concentration and you always want to
make sure to think about this because if
it's hydroxide ion that's different so
we can calculate pH pH is minus log of
3.5 4 times 10 to the minus 4 which is
equal to pH of three point four five and
here we have two significant figures
after the decimal point because the
volume we had before only had two
significant figures everything else had
three but the volume was just one point
zero so that is our answer there all
right so I'm gonna just briefly start
what happens well actually we'll do
we'll do is next this is how you would
design the buffer for this
next time we'll see what happens if we
stress the buffer we designed by adding
acid to it and see what the new result
is all right so today we're going to
finish lecture 22 so take out those
lecture notes and on acids bases and
when we're done with that we'll just
continue with acids and bases and we're
going to continue with some acids and
bases on Wednesday but we should finish
on Wednesday and move on to oxidation
reduction and that will end exam three
material so exam three is sneaking up on
us and it'll have thermodynamics
chemical equilibrium solubility and
acid-base all right
so you should have already filled in
your handout with all the information
the parts that you were filling in are
in in bold here but I just wanted to
remind you of what we were talking about
so we had a sample buffer problem we had
one mole of a conjugate acid and a half
a mole of a conch of its conjugate base
applied in the form of a salt we're put
in water and diluted to one into one
liter so we calculated what the
hydronium ion concentration would be and
therefore the pH using information that
was given to us about the KA the acid
ionization constant so we got a pH of
three point four five someone asked me
after class but isn't this conjugate
base also reacting with water and
forming some of this weak acid and the
answer is yes that we are writing this
as a problem of acid in water because we
can use the KA
but we could have also written it the
other way and written it and this is not
in your notes but I just wanted to let
you know that the weak base in water
could be written that way forming a
conjugate acid and hydroxide ions and so
then it would be 0.5 minus X and 1 plus
X and X use Kb
then because it's a base in water to
solve for X and calculate pH from Poh
and if you try it you get three point
four five so you can do these problems
either way you can think about them as a
weak base problem or a weak acid problem
you just have to remember that there's
if this is not zero when you start the
the conjugate has some amount and that's
what makes it a good buffer so this can
work either way but you also want to
remember if you write it as an acid
water use ka if you write it as a base
in water use Kb because those
equilibrium constants are telling you
about those ratios of the conjugate acid
and the conjugate base at equilibrium so
within the KA and the KB is information
that you need about this dynamic
chemical equilibrium so both of these
ways work and by the end of sort of
halfway through today's lecture you'll
see yet another way to solve buffer
problems and probably will be for most
of you the preferred way to do it so
there's a number of different ways which
makes grading the exam lots of fun and
we have option one option two option
three to make sure that that that all
the options are possibly accounted for
all right so the purpose of a buffer is
to keep the pH pretty much constant so
you can add a strong acid to it and the
acid will be neutralized keeping the pH
constant you can add a strong base to it
and the base will be neutralized keeping
the pH pretty constant so what you want
in a buffer is to have a weak acid
conjugate base pairing that allows it to
be a source or sink for a strong acid or
a strong base to keep the pH constant so
now in this problem were asked to
calculate what would happen to the pH
0.1 moles of a strong acid had been
included in our 1 liter solution and
because 0.1 moles of our strong acid
will react with equal number of moles of
that conjugate base that's what the
conjugate base does in a buffer it
reacts with a strong acid that is
supplied and it will form equal moles
then
of the the conjugate its conjugate acid
so we have to do some subtraction so for
the conjugate acid we had point five
moles and and our sorry for the further
conjugate base we had point five moles
we used up one of that point one of that
reacting with a strong acid and we have
point four left so we have a new
concentration for our conjugate base
point four divided by one keep the math
simple point four molar so for our
conjugate acid we had one mole to begin
with but we formed point one more when
that strong acid was added so now we
have one point one moles and a new
molarity so now we have to go back and
we can use this expression again and
determine what X is now what the
hydronium ion concentration is now using
ka so why don't you tell me how I would
solve this what is the correct
expression for K a and you can fill in
your little table as you do it
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
all right so let's just fill in that
table if you haven't already so here now
we can write this as an acid in water
problem again again you could have done
the base in water and use Kb but we'll
just do it the same way we did before so
we have our acid one point one molar
now remember this is molarity so you
don't want to put moles in here you want
to put a concentration and some of that
will be minus X then we have our 0.4 0.4
plus X we can fill out the KA the KA
again weak acid and water problem we
have products hydronium ion over our our
con times our conjugate base over our
conjugate acid equals 0.4 0 0 plus X
times X these two and 1.1 minus X on the
bottom so you can always solve then for
X which will tell you about the pH by
using the KA and you just have to
remember molarity and remember these are
the new molarity after the reaction has
occurred all right so we can use the
approximation that X is small compared
to one point one and point four to
simplify this or we could use the
quadratic equation if we simplify it we
calculate X as four point eight seven
times 10 to the minus four and remember
again that the approximation is you get
rid of the plus X and the minus X here
and then you have to check it with the
5% rule if you did that if you use the
quadratic you don't have to check but if
you use the 5% rule then you're asking
is this number four point eight seven
times 10 to the minus four within five
percent of the smaller value which is
point four and it is here is 0.12
percent so the assumption is okay that's
less than five percent X is small and
then we can solve for the pH so pH is
minus log of the hydronium ion
concentration which here is three point
three one this only is two significant
figures after the decimal because if you
remember
back on the other page the volume only
had two so actually all these numbers
here really just have two significant
figures we carried an extra but it
really just had two all right so our
buffer was pretty good so we added point
1 moles of a very strong acid and we
only changed the pH we only lowered it
from three point four five to three
point three one so that was a pretty
good buffer that we had that we had
designed there all right so that is how
you do a buffer problem and there are
other types of things that you can be
asked about with buffers in particular
you can also often be asked to design a
buffer and when you design a buffer you
must consider the following things the
ratio of your conjugate acid-base pair
and that they should also be weak
conjugate acid-base pairs the pKa and
the pH okay so here comes a derivation
so here is our expression that should be
familiar to you at this point for a weak
acid AJ in water going to hydronium ions
and our conjugate base a - it should
also be familiar to you that you can
write the equilibrium expression for
this acid in water as hydronium ions
concentration times the concentration
the conjugate base over the
concentration of the conjugate acid
water which is our solvent doesn't
appear in the expression we can
rearrange this expression now and solve
for hydronium ion concentrations we can
take the log of both sides and get this
log of hydronium ion concentration log
of ka plus log of H a over a -
multiplied by negative to get this and
so we have minus - minus and minus the
log of the hydronium ion concentration
is what pH - log of ka is PKA and
this is the same as that so that gives
us this expression that pH equals PKA
minus the log of H a over a minus now
it's important to point out that these
are equilibrium concentrations of H a
and a minus because we derived this
expression from ka and that's an
equilibrium constant so these are
equilibrium expressions and that makes
this particular expression slightly less
useful because we often don't want to
have to calculate the equilibrium
concentration we know how much we added
and so we often want to use initial
concentrations but we can consider
whether the initial concentrations are
actually pretty similar to the
equilibrium concentrations ie
that X is small less than 5% so we know
that a weak acid typically only loses a
fraction of its protons
hence the definition of weak acid weak
acid in water doesn't ionize that much
and a weak base typically only accepts a
fraction of the protons that it could
it's a weak base so the initial
concentration is often approximately
equal to the equilibrium concentration
and that's what we've been finding in a
lot of these problems we find that the
5% rule works pretty well it's usually
less than 5% access usually less than 5%
of the initial concentration we had of H
a or a-minus and so therefore we can say
that the pH is in fact approximately
equal to the pKa minus the log of the
initial concentration of your H a over
your initial concentration of a minus
and this expression is known as the
henderson hasselbalch equation and so
this equation is only valid when your
hydronium ion concentration is small
compared to H a and a minus ie less than
5% so this 5% rule must apply to use the
henderson-hasselbalch equation the
henderson hasselbalch equation is a
rate equation to use for buffers
problems and so we've showed you a
couple different ways of doing buffer
problems this is the final way I'm going
to show you using the henderson
hasselbalch equation but you can only
use it if X is small but most the time X
is going to be small because buffers are
only buffers when you have a weak acid
with a conjugate weak base and when
you're talking about weak acids and
bases X is small they don't ionize that
much and importantly and I'll emphasize
this this equation only works for
buffers don't apply it for a just a
regular weak acid and water or a weak
base in water a strong acid in water a
strong base in water it only applies for
buffers buffers buffers now I know that
MIT students love equations and they
love doing math and so they try to apply
this equation to every type of acid-base
problem don't do it buffers buffers
you'll remember that now right because
I'll make noises again if you don't
you'll remember that now right all right
so let's use the henderson-hasselbalch
to design a buffer then so say we want
to design a buffer at pH 6 4.6 say
you're interviewing for your opposition
and the Europe supervisor the the PI
says tell me how you would design a
buffer pH 4.6 and you might go to the
shelf and see what was available and
then look up what the KA and PK's are
because a buffer solution is most
effective in the range of the pKa plus
or minus 1 in fact the closer the ph
that you want is to the pKa the better
the buffer it's going to be so we can
look and see what's in the range there's
several that are close to 4.6 that we
can choose from and probably you would
end up choosing
Sadek acid because that would be on the
shelf whereas some of the others of
these would not be there
alright so acetate is going to work it's
a pretty common buffer so we can use
acetic acid with a suitable pKa of 4.75
then we can use the
henderson-hasselbalch equation because
we're designing a buffer so we can use
that equation and figure out what the
ratio of acetic acid to its conjugate
base should be so we can rearrange this
expression we know the pKa and we know
the pH that we want and so we can
subtract those and we get that the log
of the ratio should be 0.15 and then
inverse log will tell us that the ratio
then of the acid to the conjugate base
should be 1.4 so you should use things
with that ratio so for example you could
use 1.4 molar of the acid to 1 molar of
the conjugate base and the the the total
amounts are often less important than
the ratio the ratio is very important
but if you go too low in concentrations
then that'll affect what's known as the
buffering capacity which is the ability
of the buffer to resist changes so if
it's too dilute and a lot of strong acid
or a lot of strong base is added then it
won't be a good buffer anymore so the
ratio is very important the amounts are
important such that you have some
resistance to change so the higher
concentrations the more resistant to
change and if you loot also if you use
too low a concentration the henderson
hasselbalch equation is no longer valid
so you can be asked to calculate sort of
what the minimum concentration is that
you would need to use and so for pH six
point four point six zero
you can back calculate what the
hydronium ion concentration is and it's
2.5 times 10 to the minus 5 so for our
5% assumption to hold or to be valid
that this number the hydronium ion
concentration is less than 5% of either
one of these the concentrations here
would have to be greater than 5 times 10
to the minus 4 so if we use 1 molar or
something that's way above this but that
would be the minimum if it's less than
that that 5% doesn't really hold and you
would not have a very good buffer in
that case it wouldn't be very resistance
to change X would be big compared to
those numbers so that's how you go about
designing a buffer and in that there
were two things that are really common
mistakes when I'm reviewing a paper for
publication two of the things that I see
the most often is that people 1 do not
use the right buffer for their
experiment they say oh I'm at PA you
know pH 8 and they'll use a buffer that
is in fact not a good buffer at pH a so
who knows what their data is telling us
and the other thing that people will do
is that they'll say oh yes it was
buffered and the pKa might be right but
the concentration of the buffer is so
low then you don't really imagine the
buffers doing anything so now you know
how to avoid both of those pitfalls